# Modifying the Factory EFI Manifold

How To Build A High-Performance Holden Six
Building the hot holden six
by snarlyjohn@gmail.com
Modifying the Factory EFI Manifold
The VK EFI manifold is an interesting piece. It doesn't look like it would flow particularly well (and it doesn't) yet some people have had pretty good results with them. Curious of their potential, I recently ran some flow tests to see what they are like in stock form as well as what can be gained through modification. In particular, I wanted to know whether there was much to be gained through fitting oversize throttle bodies and through porting the runner exits. The results are below and are interesting but sometimes surprising. All the testing was done at 28", and using a small-chamber head that flowed around 180cfm @ 0.5" lift. In other words, a moderately ported head that would be typical of a well-sorted street/strip car capable of making power in the mid 200s or a little more.
The first test was a bone stock manifold, and this gave a flow figure of about 141cfm. In other words we lost nearly 40cfm over the bare head. This sounds bad but in reality stock manifolds like this have shown they can make around 180 to 200hp, so really it's not too shabby at all for a stocker. It also reinforces the fact that good inertia and sonic wave action can overcome mediocre flow.
One of the most common modifications done is the fitting of an oversized throttle body. This will obviously give sharper throttle response but will it really make any more peak power? The stock TB is pretty generously sized so I was a bit sceptical of seeing big improvements here. The TBI was removed completely and a clay radius stuck to the manifold opening. This would have completely eliminated any restriction in the manifolds inlet. Testing showed an increase of only 3 cfm - not totally insignificant, but certainly nothing to get excited about. There was a flaw in my methodology though, and the numbers aren't really indicative of real-world operation. I tested by pulling air through only one runner; and in operation the flow through the TB of a six cylinder engine would be roughly double the peak flow of a single runner. So while my test was flawed in this case it doesn't really make any difference - increasing the intake area massively made practically no improvement anyway. It appears that the primary flow restrictions are in the plenum and runners. And after seeing the improvement in flow from opening up the plenum (in the next test) I think the best thing to do with the throttle body is to replace the single central TB with two (or even three) units - not to increase the flow of the TBs, but to minimise the longitudinal flow along the undersized plenum.
So what about the plenum? It's very small in stock form (both in volume and cross-sectional area) and could conceivably be restrictive in itself. To find out, the plenum was split lengthwise and opened up so that each runner had an essentially straight shot from the atmosphere. This had a bigger effect on flow than changing the TB - we picked up 8 cfm over a stock manifold with 149cfm. This is a worthwhile gain, but enlarging the plenum would take a bit more work than just fitting a bigger TB. Ideally though the plenum volume would at least be doubled - and if this was done a single TB of sufficient size (maybe 10mm over stock) would be fine.
The standard runners form an odd sort of nozzle shape as they approach the head face. The cross-sectional area is reduced quite a lot, and it looks very restrictive. There isn't enough meat in the walls to simply hog it out to a consistent CSA, you'd have to add quite a bit of material (by welding) first. As a test, I built up the outside wall with body filler and then ground out the runner. It looked a lot better, as if it would flow much more. Did it? Well, yes and no. When the bare manifold was tested (ie. the runner connected directly to the flow bench without a head), the modified port did indeed show a big improvement; over 10 cfm in fact with some pretty ordinary grinding. But then we don't race flow benches or engines without cylinder heads, so the head was refitted to the bench to see what sort of results could be expected in the real world. This time the improvement wasn't so exciting, and our 10+ cfm increase had shrunk back to a mere 2 cfm improvement over the stock runner..
Body filler was added to the outer wall to allow enlarging the runner for flow testing.
What the hell happened? Why did such a nice improvement fade to almost nothing when the manifold was tested in a real-world configuration (and incidentally, you can see how these figures could be used to mislead customers into believing they'd get great results when in fact they'd be getting next to nothing)? The answer lies in pressure recovery. The standard necked down port exit is quite smoothly shaped, with gradual entry and exit angles like a venturi. When this was fitted directly to the flow bench adaptor, the air was exiting the necked down runner at very high velocity straight into the 3.62" bore of the bench adaptor. The sudden increase in area meant that there was a lot of turbulence downstream of the runner and little energy was recovered as the high-velocity air slowed down. When the modified runner was tested in the same way the exit velocity into the bore was much lower, giving much less turbulence and much less energy loss.
After building up the outer wall, the runner exit was enlarged to give
a more constant cross-sectional area.
With the runner mounted on the head however, it was a different story. The high velocity air from the stock runner was allowed to slow and expand in the head port in a much more orderly fashion. In other words the head port formed the expansion section of the venturi, and much of the energy in the air was recovered. The modified port still flowed slightly better, but you'd really have to ask yourself whether it would be worth the effort for maybe 5 hp. On a very well ported head (say 200cfm and more) the improvement would be better, but really in that situation you'd be better off with a custom built manifold anyway.
By this stage it was starting to look like the most that could be expected from a modified VK manifold was not much more than 150cfm. But what if we wanted upwards of 300hp from a 12 port engine, with a nice fat torque curve? This is not unrealistic by the way - recent ports I've done in blue 173 heads have topped 200cfm while retaining high velocities, and I don't even pretend that these heads are close to being fully developed. To make these numbers we'd need more flow than a VK manifold can provide, and with this in mind I tested some runners made from steel exhaust mandrel bends. The head port end was stretched into a rectangular shape to match the head port profile, and one side flattened to allow a pair of ports to fit closely together.
Steel tube test runner. Mandrel bend showing end stretched to match head port.
Testing a 1-3/4" od bend that was about 11" long gave about 160cfm, so already we're nearly 10cfm up on a modified VK manifold. A couple of things came to light during this test, the first being the importance of a generous intake radius or bellmouth. The flow kept improving as the radius was increased right up to 20mm or so. The second was that the approach angle in to the head seems fairly important as well. Best flow was had when the tail end of the manifold runner joined the head at an angle that was horizontal or even very slightly upward pointing. It also seemed to like being pointed very slightly "outwards", or with the runner centreline pointing to the valve guide. This of course is an absolute pain in the arse to achieve with the runners positioned so closely side by side, and may partly explain why the stock runners have that weird nozzle at the exit.
So a 1-3/4" tube runner gives quite good performance and should work very well on a hot street and strip engine making power up to the high 200s. For higher outputs I doubt it would be necessary to go any bigger than 1-7/8" od tubing to get enough flow, and even at this size there will be sufficient velocity for a good spread of power. But remember that plenum volume and entry radius are critical.
So what was learned from this exercise? Well, we could summarise it like this:
There is little to be gained from using an oversize throttle body on a stock manifold. Multiple TBs on a stock manifold would help though, and with a modified plenum another 10mm or so of butterfly diameter may be useful.
There are worthwhile gains to be had from enlarging the plenum chambers cross-sectional area and volume.
Reshaping the runner exit has much less effect than you'd expect, especially with a mild engine.
Runner entry radius is critical, as is the approach angle to a lesser extent.
Obviously I haven't addressed runner lengths and their effect on inertia and wave tuning. These factors are just as important as raw flow with regard to producing power, maybe more so. But these dimensions will have to be calculated for each individual combo, based as they are on engine rpm range and cam timing. The general trends of manifold airflow however, will apply to any engine.
Another thing to keep in mind is that nothing was tested upstream of the throttle body ie. the ducting, MAF sensor or the air cleaner. These look pretty ugly as stock so there could well be good gains to be made here.
Previous page: The VK EFI
Table of Contents
Next page: Air Filters and Fuel Pumps
Copyright © 2008. Design
based on a free template from
NodeThirtyThree
Design
.